In this lecture, you'll see how to configure Dynamic NAT with a lab demo. So this lab's following on
from the previous one where we configured Static
NAT. When we did that,
we configured a Static NAT entry, for our host in the inside at 10.0.1.10.
And that was being NAT'd to the outside address of 203.0.113.3.
In this lab, we're going to configure another NAT rule to allow our PCs on the 10.0.2.0 subnet
to get out to the Internet.
And those PCs don't accept incoming connections so we don't need to configure static rules for
them.
We can configure a Dynamic NAT rule, which is going to give them public IP addresses on a first come,
first served basis. So, let's look at the existing configuration with this Static NAT rule first.
So I've got that configured on R1.
So if I do a show run on here and scroll down, you'll see that I've already got NAT interfaces configured
for that Static NAT rule. So fa0/0,
that's from the outside. It's got ip nat outside on there. And fa1/0,
that is the interface facing the internal server. That is configured as ip nat inside. Fa2/0,
that is the interface which faces the PCs on the 10.0.2.0 subnet.
So I need to configure that as ip nat inside as well.
You can have multiple interfaces configured as ip nat inside or ip nat outside, and whenever traffic
goes between them, it's going to get NAT'd.
You can also see a little bit further down there is that Static NAT real as well.
So the first thing I need to do is configure that interface facing the PCs for ip nat inside. So I'll go to
global configuration.
It was interface fa2/0 and I'll say ip nat inside.
So that is the interface configured.
The next thing that I need to do is configure my pool of addresses that the internal hosts can get NAT'd
to.
So the public IP address below. The command for that is ip nat pool.
I'll call this Flackbox for this example. And the range of addresses is 203.0.113.4
going up to 203.0.113.14 at the top of the range.
And I say that the netmask is 255.255.255.248. That's the subnet mask on
that public facing interface.
Next thing I do is I configure an access list where I'll specify the range of IP addresses of the host
on the inside that are going to get mapped to these public addresses.
So I'm just looking at them based on the source IP address. So I can use a standard access list here.
So I'll use access-list 1 and permit and the subnet that the hosts are on is 10.0.2.0
with a wildcard mask of 0.0.0.255.
So I've got my pool of addresses configured.
I've got my access list specifying my inside host configured.
The last thing that I need to do here is tie them together.
And the way I do that is I'd say ip nat inside source.
And rather than being static for a Static NAT entry, it is a list.
And I say 1, to say that it is access-list 1 and pool Flackbox.
So that ties the access list and the pool together. And that is it. Done.
So that is my configuration done.
All I need to do now really is check that it is working.
So I'll do a debug here to watch it working. So I'll just debug ip nat and I'll go on to my first PC,
which is PC1, and ping the host on the outside. Let's
just check what its IP address was.
So I'm on 10.0.2.10 and I'm going to ping 203.0.113.20 on the
outside and PC1 should be NAT'd to the first address in the pool, which is going to be
203.0.113.4.
So let's just verify that.
203.0.113.20.
So ping 203.0.113.20 and the ping works. So connectivity is good.
And if I jump back onto R1, I can see my debug output there that was happening in real time.
The source 10.0.2.10 and it was NAT'd to 203.0.113.4 as expected.
And the outside address 203.0.113.20. Let's put some lines in here
so we can see a gap and I'll ping from PC2 as well.
So ping 203.0.113.20 on the outside and then jump back on to R1.
And you can see there's a source 10.0.2.11 has been NAT'd to the next address in the pool, which is
203.0.113.5.
And the outside address 203.0.113.20. I can also do a show ip nat translations.
And if I've done this quick enough, I can see both entries in the NAT translation table as well.
OK, so that's how we can configure and verify Dynamic NAT.
If I want it to clear these translations, the ones we see in the table there.
Let's just ping again to make sure that it doesn't time out on its own. So I'll ping from PC1 and
PC2. And I'll do an undebug all to get rid of the debug
output, and a show ip nat translations again.
And if I wanted to clear these because I was doing troubleshooting, then I can do a
show ip nat translation and then a star for all.
And if I now do my show command again, I can see that they have been removed.
I've just got these static entries still in there. Now, the dynamic ones have been removed.
OK, so that was everything I needed to show you.
One last thing.
Let's look at the statistics command as well.
So show ip nat statistics.
And there you can see how many NAT hits
we've got. Not so many packets being sent through
our NAT rule.
We verified everything's working, so we're all good.
But a potential problem with this is that you've got a limited number of addresses in your pool.
And once you hit that limit, then other hosts won't be able to get to the outside because they won't
be NAT'd to an IP address.
So the way that we can expand that range is by using PAT, Port Address Translation.
We'll cover that in the next lecture.